blog: Add GSoC'26 blog on Hyperlight platform in KraftKit (#563)
unikraft/docs: content/blog/2026-06-19-unikraft-gsoc-hyperlight-platform.mdx

- kraftkit
- hyperlight
- unikraft
---

## Project Overview

Hyperlight is a lightweight micro-VM / sandbox runtime that provides an ultra-secure and lightweight environment for running VMs. To me, Unikraft and Hyperlight look similar: in Unikraft you can create a lightweight kernel by cherry-picking the components you need, and in Hyperlight you create your own host functions that can be called by the guest, providing a lightweight and ultra-secure environment with ultra-fast boot times. In this project, we are integrating Hyperlight into Unikraft and KraftKit, so you can run Unikraft unikernels on Hyperlight.

## Objectives

The main objective of this project is to integrate [Hyperlight](https://github.com/hyperlight-dev/hyperlight) as a [KraftKit](https://github.com/unikraft/kraftkit) machine platform, enabling users to run [Unikraft](https://github.com/unikraft/unikraft) unikernels on Hyperlight. This involves creating a new machine driver for Hyperlight, mapping KraftKit CLI flags and project configuration to Hyperlight runtime options, and supporting essential features such as volumes, networking, ports, and lifecycle commands (run/stop/logs/etc.). 

## Current Progress

> Dan Chiarlone (Hyperlight maintainer) is maintaining the Hyperlight host or binary ([Hyperlight-Unikraft](https://github.com/hyperlight-dev/hyperlight-unikraft)) to run Unikraft unikernels on Hyperlight. I have been working with him to implement the Hyperlight platform in KraftKit.

Reviewer: what do you mean `Hyperlight host or binary`?

Author: The binary (host in the language of hyperlight) that runs unikernels?

Reviewer: okay, then keep only `host` - it becomes confusing to state both

> Dan Chiarlone (Hyperlight maintainer) is maintaining the Hyperlight host or binary ([Hyperlight-Unikraft](https://github.com/hyperlight-dev/hyperlight-unikraft)) to run Unikraft unikernels on Hyperlight. I have been working with him to implement the Hyperlight platform in KraftKit.

Reviewer: maybe link Dan's GitHub here?

> As of today, I have successfully implemented all the Hyperlight platform-supported features for Unikraft with the combined efforts of my mentors and the Hyperlight and Unikraft teams.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this first stage, I have successfully implemented all the Hyperlight platform-supported features for Unikraft with the combined efforts of my mentors and the Hyperlight and Unikraft teams.
```

### Hyperlight machine driver scaffolding

>      - Platform-specific run flags (`feat(machine/hyperlight): Add platform-specific run flags`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Platform-specific run flags
```

### Requests per second

   <Image
        src="/images/hyperlight/wrk_get_requests_per_sec.png"
        title="Requests per second chart for Hyperlight, QEMU and Firecracker. Testing with wrk"
   />

Hyperlight has higher req/sec compared to both QEMU and Firecracker. Same application and setup as the latency test with wrk load testing.

## Thoughts on Hyperlight

Hyperlight is a very promising VMM with ultra-fast boot times and strong security. It is still in development, and a smart team is working on it. I am excited to see how Hyperlight evolves in the future and how it can be used in various use cases.
You can create your own hosts according to your needs using the SDK, or you can use Unikraft to run lightweight unikernels without directly working with the Hyperlight SDK. The Unikraft and Hyperlight teams are working hard to unlock its full capabilities.

## Next Steps

Here are some of the next steps for the Hyperlight platform in Unikraft/KraftKit:
     - CI / integration tests for the Hyperlight driver
     - Example unikernel workflows end-to-end

>      - Additional Hyperlight runtime surfaces or unsupported flag handling for future Hyperlight features

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - CI / integration tests for the Hyperlight driver
 - Example unikernel workflows end-to-end
 - Additional Hyperlight runtime surfaces or unsupported flag handling for future Hyperlight features
```

## Acknowledgements

> I would like to thank my mentors (Cezar Craciunoiu, Alex-Andrei Cioc), Dan Chiarlone for his help with Hyperlight integration on Unikraft, and the Unikraft and Hyperlight teams for their support and guidance throughout this project. This work would not have been possible without their help and collaboration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I would like to thank my mentors (Cezar Craciunoiu, Alex-Andrei Cioc) and Dan Chiarlone for his help with Hyperlight integration on Unikraft, and the Unikraft and Hyperlight teams for their support and guidance throughout this project. This work would not have been possible without their help and collaboration.
```

In this first stage, I have successfully implemented all the Hyperlight platform-supported features for Unikraft with the combined efforts of my mentors and the Hyperlight and Unikraft teams.

### Hyperlight machine driver scaffolding

- Platform-specific run flags
- Driver input validation and command/lifecycle hardening
- Platform alias acceptance in machine commands

### Volume and filesystem mapping

- KraftKit volume → Hyperlight mount mapping
- Rootfs / ROM filesystem metadata propagation
- `no-rootfs` and default rootfs type handling

### Networking and ports

- Guest port mappings (`--port GUEST:GUEST`)
- `--hyperlight-net`, `--hyperlight-net-allow`, `--hyperlight-net-block` flags
- Network policy validation (mutually exclusive allow/block lists)

### Lifecycle, logging, and edge cases

- Log following after machine exit
- Watch mode terminal state transitions
- Pause/cleanup behavior

### Documentation

- README updates for supported run options and Hyperlight binary source

### Testing the Hyperlight platform

I have tested the Hyperlight platform with various Unikraft unikernels/examples and have verified that it functions correctly under different scenarios.

> [Here are some examples to try](https://github.com/unikraft/catalog/tree/main/examples/hyperlight)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Here are some examples to try](https://github.com/unikraft/catalog/tree/main/examples/hyperlight).
```

## Benchmarks

> Enough talking, Let's see how Hyperlight performs compared to other VMMs like QEMU and Firecracker.

Reviewer: @ijaidev you can accept this suggestion

### Boot Time

<Image
  src="/images/hyperlight/native-boottime.png"
  title="Boot Time benchmarks chart for Hyperlight, QEMU and Firecracker"

> />

Reviewer: @ijaidev you can accept this suggestion

Hyperlight has ultra-fast boot times, around 246x faster than QEMU and 214x faster than Firecracker.
Tested with [Native C application Unikernel](https://github.com/unikraft/catalog/tree/main/examples/hyperlight/helloworld-c-native).

### Network Latency

<Image
  src="/images/hyperlight/vegeta_get_latency.png"
  title="Network Latency chart for Hyperlight, QEMU and Firecracker. Testing with Vegeta"

> />

Reviewer: @ijaidev you can accept this suggestion

Hyperlight has slightly lower network latency compared to QEMU and Firecracker.

> Async networking support was in development at the time of testing (supported now), so the tests were done with sync/blocking networking on a [Go syscall-blocking HTTP server](https://github.com/unikraft/catalog/tree/main/examples/hyperlight/httpserver-go1.21) with Vegeta load testing on `GET` requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Async networking support was in development at the time of testing, so the tests were done with sync/blocking networking on a [Go syscall-blocking HTTP server](https://github.com/unikraft/catalog/tree/main/examples/hyperlight/httpserver-go1.21) with Vegeta load testing on `GET` requests.
Note that async networking is supported at the time of writing.
```

<Image
  src="/images/hyperlight/wrk_get_latency.png"
  title="Network Latency chart for Hyperlight, QEMU and Firecracker. Testing with wrk"

> />

Reviewer: @ijaidev you can accept this suggestion

Same application and setup as Vegeta, but with wrk load testing.
Hyperlight has slightly higher latency compared to Firecracker and lower than QEMU.

### Requests per second

<Image
  src="/images/hyperlight/wrk_get_requests_per_sec.png"
  title="Requests per second chart for Hyperlight, QEMU and Firecracker. Testing with wrk"

> />

Reviewer: @ijaidev you can accept this suggestion

Hyperlight has higher req/sec compared to both QEMU and Firecracker.
Same application and setup as the latency test with wrk load testing.

> `These benchmarks are not exhaustive and may vary based on the unikernel, workload, and system configuration. However, they provide a good indication of Hyperlight's performance characteristics.`

Reviewer: @ijaidev this is relevant

## Thoughts on Hyperlight

Hyperlight is a very promising VMM with ultra-fast boot times and strong security.
It is still in development, and a smart team is working on it.
I am excited to see how Hyperlight evolves in the future and how it can be used in various use cases.
You can create your own hosts according to your needs using the SDK, or you can use Unikraft to run lightweight unikernels without directly working with the Hyperlight SDK.
The Unikraft and Hyperlight teams are working hard to unlock its full capabilities.

## Next Steps

Here are some of the next steps for the Hyperlight platform in Unikraft/KraftKit:

- CI / integration tests for the Hyperlight driver
- Example unikernel workflows end-to-end
- Additional Hyperlight runtime surfaces or unsupported flag handling for future Hyperlight features

## Acknowledgements

> I would like to thank my mentors ([Cezar Craciunoiu](https://github.com/craciunoiuc), [Alex-Andrei Cioc](https://github.com/nurof3n)) and [Dan Chiarlone](https://github.com/danbugs) for his help with Hyperlight integration on Unikraft, and the Unikraft and Hyperlight teams for their support and guidance throughout this project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I would like to thank my mentors ([Cezar Craciunoiu](https://github.com/craciunoiuc), [Alex-Andrei Cioc](https://github.com/nurof3n)) and [Dan Chiarlone](https://github.com/danbugs) for their help with Hyperlight integration on Unikraft, and the Unikraft and Hyperlight teams for their support and guidance throughout this project.
```
